[blog]: /website/blog/0005_beyond_mvc.md
# Changing the QMS Document Paradigm for SOPs

All organizations are procedural. To achieve anything, you must follow a set of steps to achieve your desired end result. When you're small, it's easy to communicate procedures as you can gather everybody in your organization to discuss new ways of working to improve the quality of the product you produce. As you grow or for companies operating in industries like healthcare or finance, you must go beyond verbally communicated procedures.

We'll go through the three levels of organization (as defined by us in [this post][blog]) and what you should consider when implementing your procedures. The TL;DR -- when you're small and the result of not following a procedure does not have an impact beyond your own operating efficiency, you can verbally communicate procedures. Once you start to grow or when procedures can have an impact on the safety of another person, you need to start writing down your procedures and notify your staff when procedures are created or updated.

## Level 1 Organizations

If you're a level one organization, you're probably already communicating when things don't go to plan. Whenever something does not go as you planned write down the procedure into central list of procedures and consider the following when writing down the steps
* Identify the entry criteria (when you start the procedure)
* Identify who should do each step
* Use an active voice 
* Be concise and clear 
* Be specific

Let's look at an good and bad example

### Bad Example via Email

> When we hire somebody, they need an email account, make sure it gets done! - The Boss

### Good Example In Doc

> One to two weeks before an employee joins, the office manager will
> * Notify the IT system administrator and ensure the new hire has the following items on day 1
>   * Company laptop 
>   * Functional email address
>   * Company phone if requested by the employee
> * Register the employees company contact information in the account management system
> * Gather the employee's tax ID and register them with the local tax authority
> * Prepare and send a welcome email to test the employees email account

The written procedures clarify the 5 Ws without having the weight of a traditional, highly controlled set of procedures and the IT admin can use the bullets as a checklist to help improve the new hire experience and not being yelled at by their boss.

[sbar-md]: /website/qms/procedures/IT-245-SystemBackupandRecovery.md

## Level 2 Organizations 

If you're level 2 organization, this is where more rigor and structure is needed for procedures. When you have multiple individuals that could be executing the same procedures you should start considering layering on the following 5 Ws by breaking procedures into departments and enforcing a document structure that includes:

* Purpose: **Why** is it important to follow these procedures
* Scope: **What** things do these procedures apply to
* Roles and Responsibilities: **Who** needs to follow these procedures
* Entry/Exit Criteria: **When** do we apply these procedures
* Procedures: **How** do I achieve the purpose

Our [system backup and recovery sop][sbar-md] is an living example of the above points in action. By breaking the procedures up into departments and having a consistent layout, you're preparing for an enterprise level of scale that we'll cover in our next section.


[sbar-pdf]: /website/qms/procedures/IT-245-SystemBackupandRecovery.pdf
[eidas]: https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/eidas-regulation
[sop]: /website/qms/glossary.md#standard-operating-procedure-sop 
[qa]: /website/qms/glossary.md#quality-assurance-qa
[sme]: /website/qms/glossary.md#subject-matter-expert-sme
[sep]: /website/qms/glossary.md#separation-of-concerns
[gdp]: /website/qms/glossary.md#good-documentation-practices-gdp
[iso]: https://www.iso.org/standard/62085.html
[qms]: /website/qms/glossary.md#quality-management-system-qms
[cfr11]: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-21/chapter-I/subchapter-A/part-11
[esiga]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_Signatures_in_Global_and_National_Commerce_Act
[iche6r3]: https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/ICH_E6(R3)_Step4_FinalGuideline_2025_0106.pdf
[saas]: /website/qms/glossary.md
[gh]: https://github.com
[gl]: https://about.gitlab.com/
[ux]: /website/qms/glossary.md#user-experience-ux

## Level 3 Organizations

As organizations expand or operate within heavily regulated sectors, the need for formalized procedures becomes paramount. This is the stage where we embrace the much loved [Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)][sop]. With growth comes the necessity for heightened standards, ensuring that every team member is well-versed in key procedures to deliver a quality service. Achieving compliance at this level demands a greater degree of rigor and a structured process framework. This methodology aligns with [Good Documentation Practices (GDP)][gdp] in clinical settings or more broadly as part of a [Quality Management System (QMS)][qms] as outlined by [ISO 9001][iso] standards.

In addition to the L1 and L2 points above, you need to start thinking about layering in more metadata into your documents that give employees the context needed to know what's changed, how it impacts how your job is done, and when the new procedures apply. For L3 organizations, these things now need to be tracked:

* A revision history with all of the document changes
* References to a central glossary of well defined terms
* Observer the [separation of concerns principle][sep] and include an author, reviewer, and approver that are qualified [SME][sme] and/or members of a [QA][qa] group 
* Electronic signature for all SOPs per a standard like [CFR 21 part 11][cfr11] (clinical trials), [ESIGN Act][esiga] (US) or [eIDAS][eidas] (EU) to name a few
* Have a document version and ID
* Have a publication and effective data
* Have markings to indicate if the document is an official copy or effective
* Have number indicators for the page, chapter, section, and subsections so they can be references in training materials and other documents.

In addition to the above meta data, you also need to have the following procedural steps
* Notification system to indicate when a new version of the [SOP][sop] is effective for all impacted roles
* For some heavily regulated industries -- formalized training including acknowledgment and tests for employees to demonstrate comprehension of the procedure to satisfy regulations like [ICH E6 (R3)][iche6r3]
* A process for authoring, reviewing, and approving the documents that includes electronic signatures

There are many organizations that provide paid services to manage a system that does all of the above for you. You can also achieve the above by putting together general systems like Word and Docusign to achieve the same outcome. However, at Neosofia, we want quality management systems to be free for all. A combination of open source tools, new ways of thinking about maintaining a QMS, and an easy to use interface led us to the creation of *Neosofia QMS docs*. 

## Neosofia QMS Docs

A document management system designed to efficiently meet the needs of any organization that requires a [QMS][qms].

### How is it Different?

Traditional [SaaS][saas] document management platforms that meet the needs of a [QMS][qms] require large OpEx budgets to pay for user licensing or rely on labor intensive procedures to manage yourself with Word documents. The room for inconsistencies and errors in the traditional Word doc truffle-shuffle style of quality document management can also be a problem for organizations that have not elected to go the [SaaS][saas] route as standards are not enforced. Even modern [SaaS][saas] systems have challenges when it comes to traceability and transparency.

Neosofia QMS Docs changes the paradigm by
* Giving 100% of the document author's focus on document content -- not document formatting
* Eliminating **all** metadata management -- the workflow produces 
* Putting all of your data in your hands in a portable format
* Continually validating  the structure of your documents
* Producing an official version of your document that is identical to your working copy in terms of content
* No OpEx and reduced operational overhead

Gone are the days of forgetting to turn on track changes, manually curating a change logs, trying to correctly format level 4 heading in Word docs, wet signatures, overpriced [SaaS][saas] software etc.

### It's too Good to Be True -- What's the Catch?

There are only two catches as of the writing of this blog post that will be addressed in the future:
1. The user interface for working on documents is limited
1. Advanced features like structural validation and separation of concerns require a SaaS service like [GitHub][gh] or [GitLab][gl]. These services could have a monthly fee associated with it if your organization does not currently use them or if you don't want your QMS docs to be public.

Improvements to the [UX][ux] around document management and guides on how to self-host Neosofia QMS Docs will be made available over time. 

### How do I Get Started?

When the consumer product is launched (end April) you'll be able to copy a set of templates, modify them for your organization and have an automatically generated set of version controlled documents with rich metadata that is automatically embedded in the final QMS document.


[sbar-pdf]: /website/qms/procedures/IT-245-SystemBackupandRecovery.pdf
[code]: https://github.com/Neosofia/corporate/tree/main/website/doc

### How Does it Work?

For the curious, the system is built on top of the world's best version control system (git) and breaks down into three parts:
* Markdown files for the content of the QMS Docs
* Git (and optionally GitHub/GitLab) for the document metadata
* Code (bash and LaTeX) that handles all the structural validation and document generation based on the markdown (content) and metadata (git)

You don't even need to know how to use git to author changes to documents as providers like GitHub and GitLab have very easy to use document editing tools that are all done through your browser in addition to a wide range of text editors that also support local editing and preview of markdown files. 

And the markdown file we linked to earlier is already being programmatically generated into a [pdf version][sbar-pdf] based on our alpha version of [the code][code].

We'll dive into the architecture, design, and implementation details in another blog post when the system approaches its first release.


## Conclusion

[QMS][qms] documents don't need to be overpriced or hard to manage/use. By separating the content of the document from the presentation and metadata, we can automate the mundane parts of the process, simplify collaboration, and enforce standards that give your company a competitive edge.